Iox #910 quality declaration document (#918)
eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx: QUALITY_DECLARATION.md

### Public API Documentation [3.ii]

The public API is documented in form of Doxygen comments and available as API reference on [iceoryx.io](https://iceoryx.io/).

### License [3.iii]

The license for Eclipse iceoryx is the Apache License 2.0, and all of the code includes a header stating that.
The full license text is available in the [`LICENSE`](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/LICENSE) file.
The project includes a [`NOTICE`](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/NOTICE.md) with links to more information about these licenses.

There is some third-party content included with Eclipse iceoryx which is licensed as MIT or New BSD.
Details can also be found in the included [`NOTICE`](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/NOTICE.md#third-party-dependencies) document.

### Copyright Statement [3.iv]

Each source code file in Eclipse iceoryx has a copyright header that needs to follow this [style](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#header).

A CI job ensures by checking with `ament_copyright` that all files comply with this rule.

## Testing [4]

> Every iceoryx package has a `test` folder that contains subfolders for [module -or integrationtests](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#testing) written based on the Google test Framework. All tests are running on the CI for every Pull-Request and merge to master for all supported platforms.

Reviewer: shouldn't this be `module- and/or integrationtests`?

There is continuous effort ongoing to cover the corner cases in the usage of iceoryx.

### Public API Testing [4.ii]

For every major feature all are tests executed. New features must provide unit and integration tests that cover the code changes in the Pull-Request. The tests reside in separated folders for every package following a defined structure and naming convention.
The features are tested on module(unit) -integration and system test level. [Guidelines](https://iceoryx.io/latest/advanced/best-practice-for-testing/) for Contributors ensure high quality for test development.

### Coverage [4.iii]

The Eclipse iceoryx project use [gcov](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Gcov.html) to capture the following coverage types:

- Line Coverage
- Function Coverage
- Branch Coverage

The coverage results of every Pull-Request and master branch are publicly available on [codecov.io](https://app.codecov.io/gh/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx).

> If the user wants a more detailed report (e.g. the coverage in the different packages), he can follow [this](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#coverage-scan) guide to obtain them locally.

Reviewer: a little bit more diversity `she can follow` :)

Reviewer 2: Another possibility would be `one can follow` then we just assume consciousness or that some kind of entity is reading this.

### Linters and Static Analysis [4.v]

The code formatting is enforced through the CI using `clang-format` and can be used by following this [guide](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#coding-style)

The codebase is linted with `clang-tidy` to enforce naming conventions and basic coding rules and checked in the Pull-Requests by review.
A [static code analysis](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#static-code-analysis) is done regularly with the Axivion Suite to check against a defined [ruleset](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/tools/axivion/axivion_config.json), but the results are not publicly accessible due to licensing.

## Dependencies [5]

### Direct Runtime ROS Dependencies [5.i]

As an external dependency, there are no ROS dependencies in `iceoryx_hoofs`, `iceoryx_posh`, and `iceoryx_binding_c`.

### Optional Direct Runtime ROS Dependencies [5.ii]

As an external dependency, there are no ROS dependencies in `iceoryx_hoofs`, `iceoryx_posh`, and `iceoryx_binding_c`.

### Direct Runtime non-ROS Dependency [5.iii]

> The only runtime dependency is the [Access Control List](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Access-control_list) support that can be installed within the system packages. The underlying filesystem needs to support ACL.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we need to state that a POSIX system is required, e.g. `Beside a POSIX compliant OS, the only runtime ...` since we also need `pthread`, etc.

This document is a declaration of software quality for the `iceoryx_hoofs`, `iceoryx_posh` and `iceoryx_binding_c` packages, based on the guidelines in [REP-2004](https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2004.html). These packages are part of the Eclipse iceoryx middleware.

# Quality Declaration

The packages `iceoryx_hoofs`, `iceoryx_posh` and `iceoryx_binding_c` claims to be in the **Quality Level 2** category. In the following documentation these packages are referred as `iceoryx`. Some of the rationales in this document refer to the complete project.

Below are the rationales, notes, and caveats for this claim, organized by each requirement listed in the [Package Requirements for Quality Level 2 in REP-2004](https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2004.html).

See [the Readme](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx#quality-levels--platforms) for a full list of the quality levels of iceoryx components and [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#quality-levels) for a description of the quality levels.

## Version Policy [1]

### Version Scheme [1.i]

`iceoryx` follows the `semver` scheme for versioning.

> In particular the version numbers have the following meaning:

Author: @mossmaurice See this post about the exception: https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/pull/918#discussion_r701044928

Given a version number MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH, increment the:

1. MAJOR version when you make incompatible API/ABI changes,

> 2. MINOR version when you add functionality in a backwards compatible manner. This means that changes are API compatible and ideally ABI stable if not otherwise clearly stated in the release notes

Author: @elfenpiff We should stick as much as possible to the semver policy, especially for the iceoryx packages that are integrated into ROS 2. Generally the packages are as shared library present in ROS 2 but we need to be especially careful when working on releases because we need also to ensure that we are "shared memory compatible". 

Here some rules from the [ROS 2 Developer Guide]() regarding the ABI stability:

> - For compiled code, the ABI is considered part of the public interface. Any change that requires recompiling dependent code is considered major (breaking).
     - ABI breaking changes can be made in a minor version bump before a distribution release (getting added to the rolling release).

The exception where it is allowed is the rolling distribution where the development in ROS 2 is ongoing. We can break the API but only under the assumption that also the corresponding dependencies (in our case cyclonedds or maybe rmw_cyclonedds_cpp) get updated too. This need some coordination though.

That's why we need to have this strict policy.

### Version Stability [1.ii]

`iceoryx` is at a stable version, i.e. `>= 1.0.0`. The latest valid release can be found on the [release page](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/releases) of iceoryx.

The change history can be found in the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

### Public API Declaration [1.iii]

All symbols in the installed headers are considered part of the public API.

Except for the exclusions listed below, all installed headers are in the include directory of the package, headers in any other folders are not installed and considered private. Headers under the folder `internal` are not considered part of the public API and are subject to change without notice.

### API Stability Within a Released ROS Distribution [1.iv]/[1.vi]

`iceoryx` guarantees public API stability for MINOR and PATCH releases and can not guarantee public API stability for MAJOR releases.

Taking into account that `iceoryx` is integrated as shared-memory transport layer in

> [Eclipse CycloneDDS](https://github.com/eclipse-cyclonedds/cyclonedds) and in [rmw_iceoryx](https://github.com/ros2/rmw_iceoryx) it is necessary to schedule releases and do compatibility testing to avoid disruption towards ROS 2.

Author: Yes added a comment in the version section

### ABI Stability Within a Released ROS Distribution [1.v]/[1.vi]

> `iceoryx` aims to be ABI-stable for MINOR and PATCH releases for maintaining ROS releases.

Author: Made it more explici

Maintaining release branches with the same policies like the `master` branch, are used by ROS 2 with long-term support.

## Change Control Process [2]

The Eclipse iceoryx project follows the recommended guidelines of the [Eclipse Development Process](https://www.eclipse.org/projects/dev_process/).

The Eclipse Foundation manages write access to project repositories, allowing only designated [Committers](https://www.eclipse.org/projects/dev_process/#4_1_Committers), who have been voted for in elections overseen by the Eclipse Foundation, to commit changes.

> API and ABI stability is part of the review process. The Eclipse iceoryx project runs CI and tests on multiple platforms with different compilers.

Author: I've created a ticket based on your posting: https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/issues/919

It is planned to build and test the changes on the ROS CI for early detection of breaking changes.

### Change Requests [2.i]

> All changes in the codebase are done with a Pull-Request. It is mandatory to link the Pull-Request to a corresponding issue ticket on GitHub to ensure traceability.

Author: Yes, added a link

The contributor and reviewer is required to fill out a [Pull-Request Template](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md) before merging.

### Contributor Origin [2.ii]

This project uses DCO as its confirmation of contributor origin policy.
More information can be found in [Eclipse Foundation's DCO policy](https://www.eclipse.org/legal/DCO.php).
Eclipse projects furthermore require from the contributor that an [Eclipse Contributor Agreement](https://www.eclipse.org/legal/ECA.php) is on file with the Eclipse Foundation.

### Peer Review Policy [2.iii]

All pull requests must pass peer-review and can only be merged if two Committers (Maintainer) approve it.
Check [Eclipse Developer Process](https://www.eclipse.org/projects/dev_process/) for additional information.

### Continuous Integration [2.iv]

> Pull requests are required to pass all tests in the CI system prior to merging, unless Committers consider there is sufficient evidence that a failure is the result of a mishap unrelated to the change. Cyclone DDS CI results are public and cover x64 platforms running Linux, macOS and Windows:

Author: The PMC lead of the project can override this, but this is the exception.

> Pull requests are required to pass all tests in the CI system prior to merging, unless Committers consider there is sufficient evidence that a failure is the result of a mishap unrelated to the change. Cyclone DDS CI results are public and cover x64 platforms running Linux, macOS and Windows:

Author: @mossmaurice I have the feeling that there is a misunderstanding here so I will this section more clear

> Pull requests are required to pass all tests in the CI system prior to merging, unless Committers consider there is sufficient evidence that a failure is the result of a mishap unrelated to the change. Cyclone DDS CI results are public and cover x64 platforms running Linux, macOS and Windows:

Author: Yes it is planned, until there is no public CI job running for QNX running, I would leave that out from the this list.

Regularly tested platforms on CI:
[![Build & Test](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/actions/workflows/build-test.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/actions/workflows/build-test.yml)

These are run with a mixture of release, release with debug symbols, debug, and address sanitizer builds. All CI builds build and execute all tests, including system level tests.

### Documentation Policy [2.v]

It is required to create/modify the doxygen/design and user documentation within a Pull-Request if necessary and checked by reviewers.

## Documentation [3]

### Feature Documentation [3.i]

> The documentation of the main iceoryx features (sending,receiving data) is done within the [overview] and [iceoryx examples](https://iceoryx.io/latest/getting-started/examples/) including a user-friendly description on how to use the iceoryx API.

Author: added the link

The [configuration guide](https://iceoryx.io/latest/advanced/configuration-guide/) completes the documentation on how to use iceoryx.

A detailed technical documentation about iceoryx features can be found in the [design document](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/tree/master/doc/design) section with descriptions and diagrams about internal mechanisms of iceoryx.

> For new features it is recommended to create first a design document, see the [Contribution Guidelines](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#feature-request-and-bugs) for more information.

Author: If that is the agreement for all then I will surely change that.

> For new features it is recommended to create first a design document, see the [Contribution Guidelines](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#feature-request-and-bugs) for more information.

Reviewer 3: An alternative is written in the `CONTRIBUTING.md`

> Raise the proposed changes during a developer meetup

Diagrams in feature descriptions need to be consistently generated from [PlantUML](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/tree/master/doc/design#design-documents).

> Currently the Committers are working for completion of the documentation of existing features to reach quality level 1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, the committers are working for completion of the documentation of existing features to reach quality level 1.
```

### Public API Documentation [3.ii]

The public API is documented in form of Doxygen comments and available as API reference on [iceoryx.io](https://iceoryx.io/).

### License [3.iii]

The license for Eclipse iceoryx is the Apache License 2.0, and all of the code includes a header stating that.
The full license text is available in the [`LICENSE`](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/LICENSE) file.
The project includes a [`NOTICE`](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/NOTICE.md) with links to more information about these licenses.

> There is some third-party content included with Eclipse iceoryx which is licensed as MIT or New BSD.

Author: This is why I linked the NOTICE file where you can find the list.

Details can also be found in the included [`NOTICE`](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/NOTICE.md#third-party-dependencies) document.

### Copyright Statement [3.iv]

> Each source code file in Eclipse iceoryx has a copyright header that needs to follow this [form](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#header).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each source code file in Eclipse iceoryx has a copyright header that needs to follow this [style](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#header).
```

A CI job ensures by checking with `ament_copyright` that all files comply to this rule.

## Testing [4]

Every iceoryx package has a `test` folder that contains subfolders for [module -or integrationtests](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#testing) written based on the Googletest Framework. All tests are running on the CI for every Pull-Request and merge to master for all supported platforms.

> Currently due to limited support on Windows there are some exclusions for testing on the CI.

Author: A new Github issue would be a good place to address this?

### Feature Testing [4.i]

The features of iceoryx are tested by the [iceoryx_integrationtest](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/tree/master/iceoryx_integrationtest) package. Using `launch_test` are tests on system-level executed to ensure that the iceoryx packages are functional and the Public API usable.
There is continuos effort ongoing to cover the corner-cases in the usage of iceoryx.

### Public API Testing [4.ii]

> For every major feature in iceoryx are tests executed. It is mandatory for new features to provide tests that covers the code changes in the Pull-Request. The tests reside in separated folders for every package following a defined structure and naming convention.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For every major feature in iceoryx all tests are executed. It is mandatory for new features to provide unit and integration tests that cover the code changes in the Pull-Request. The tests reside in separated folders for every package following a defined structure and naming convention.
```

The features are tested on module(unit) -integration and system test level. [Guidelines](https://iceoryx.io/latest/advanced/best-practice-for-testing/) for Contributors ensure a high quality for test development.

### Coverage [4.iii]

The Eclipse iceoryx project use [gcov](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Gcov.html) to capture the following coverage types:

- Line Coverage
- Function Coverage
- Branch Coverage

> The coverage results of every Pull-Request and master branch are publicly available in [codecov.io](https://app.codecov.io/gh/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The coverage results of every Pull-Request and master branch are publicly available on [codecov.io](https://app.codecov.io/gh/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx).
```

> If the user want a more detailed report (e.g. the coverage in the different packages), he can follow [this](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#coverage-scan) guide to obtain them locally.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the user wants a more detailed report (e.g. the coverage in the different packages), he can follow [this](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#coverage-scan) guide to obtain them locally.
```

### Performance [4.iv]

> The most important measurement units for performance testing on iceoryx are the data transfer latency and the CPU load.

Author: Yes that's a good additional performance measure. For now, I tend to capture the current state of quality measures and the diff to quality level 1. Let's add this to the document once there is a test available that tracks the memory usage for optimization.

They can be obtained in two ways:

1. [iceperf](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/tree/master/iceoryx_examples/iceperf#iceperf)

> This performance test uses directly the iceoryx API without any indirections to compare different IPC mechanisms on increasing payload sizes. The output is a table linking the payload sizes with the latency in microseconds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This performance test uses the iceoryx API directly without any indirections to compare different IPC mechanisms on increasing payload sizes. The output is a table linking the payload sizes with the latency in microseconds.
```

2. [performance_test](https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test/-/tree/master/)
The `performance_test` package tests various middleware implementations in ROS using inter-process communication.
It offers a communication binding for iceoryx and gives information about latency, CPU usage etc.

> Additionally it is possible to test here the integration of iceoryx + CycloneDDS in ROS 2 using the rmw communication abstraction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, it is possible to test here the integration of iceoryx + CycloneDDS in ROS 2 using the rmw communication abstraction.
```

> Currently there are no automatic regression tests in the CI running, the work to integrate this is addressed in [https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/issues/137](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/issues/137). The performance tests are currently executed manually before every release that will integrated into ROS by the maintainers to avoid performance regression.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, there are no automatic regression tests in the CI running. The work to integrate this is addressed in [https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/issues/137](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/issues/137). The performance tests are currently executed manually before every release that will integrated into ROS 2 by the maintainers to avoid performance regression.
```

> Currently there are no automatic regression tests in the CI running, the work to integrate this is addressed in [https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/issues/137](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/issues/137). The performance tests are currently executed manually before every release that will integrated into ROS by the maintainers to avoid performance regression.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Currently there are no automatic regression tests in the CI running, the work to integrate this is addressed in [https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/issues/137](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/issues/137). The performance tests are currently executed manually before every release that will be integrated into ROS by the maintainers to avoid performance regression.
```

### Linters and Static Analysis [4.v]

The code formatting is enforced through the CI using `clang-format` and can be used by following this [guide](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#coding-style)

The code base is linted with `clang-tidy` to enforce naming conventions and basic coding rules and checked in the Pull-Requests by review.

> A [static code analysis](https://github.com/eclipse-iceoryx/iceoryx/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#static-code-analysis) is done regularly with the Axivion Suite to check against the the [AUTOSAR C++14](https://www.autosar.org/fileadmin/user_upload/standards/adaptive/17-03/AUTOSAR_RS_CPP14Guidelines.pdf) rules, but the results are not publicly accessible due to licensing.

Reviewer 3: Instead of linking to the AUTOSAR rules directly, you could also link to the configuration file of Axivion here. IIRC it also contains few MISRA and CERT rules.

## Dependencies [5]

### Direct Runtime ROS Dependencies [5.i]

As an external dependency, there are no ROS dependencies in `iceoryx_hoofs`, `iceoryx_posh` and `iceoryx_binding_c`.

### Optional Direct Runtime ROS Dependencies [5.ii]

As an external dependency, there are no ROS dependencies in `iceoryx_hoofs`, `iceoryx_posh` and `iceoryx_binding_c`.

### Direct Runtime non-ROS Dependency [5.iii]

The only runtime dependency is the [Access Control List](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Access-control_list) support that can be installed within the system packages. The underlying filesystem needs to support ACL.

## Platform Support [6]

Eclipse iceoryx supports the Tier 1 platforms as described in [REP-2000](https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html).
Every iceoryx release that is integrated with ROS 2 will be build in the ROS 2 CI to ensure compatibility.

## Security [7]

### Vulnerability Disclosure Policy [7.i]

This package conforms to the Vulnerability Disclosure Policy in REP-2006.
The Eclipse Project Handbook states the project's [vulnerability disclosure policy](https://www.eclipse.org/projects/handbook/#vulnerability-disclosure) in detail.

> On the [iceoryx website](https://iceoryx.io/) is a link for reporting a security vulnerability available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the [iceoryx website](https://iceoryx.io/) one finds a link to report a security vulnerabilitiy.
```
